Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today, today, finally, I'm here with Amanda Sukinik, the
host of the Exploring anti-atalism podcast. I'm going to
link it and I'm also going to put her
as a collaborator. On my YouTube video. If you
are unaware of her podcast, please go there and
watch and listen to all the episodes because they're
awesome. And she's also the co-author of Anti-Nalism, Extinction,
and the End of Procreative Self-corruption, written with Mati
Hairu. Uh, WHICH, who I've already had on the
show twice. So Amanda, welcome to the show. Finally,
we're doing this.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. It is my absolute
pleasure to be here. I have long wanted to
be on the dissenter, so this is actually a
dream come true, a true, a true life bucket
list now checked off.
OK, so look, this is the time to laugh.
Now we're going to talk about anti-atalism, so I
guess. Uh, uh, YEAH, so, let me first ask
you, what got you interested in antenatalism? I mean,
what, uh, how did you become an antenatalist
exactly? Yeah, so, um, so, uh, without meaning to
like tell the same story that I've told a
bunch of times before, I think I always sort
of had inklings of antenatalist like thinking even as
like a younger person, but I sort of suppressed
it because there's like virtually nothing, you know, in
society that will You know, encourage such thinking, especially
in a young child, especially in a young girl
who, you know, could be the oven for a
future.
Yeah, look, look, most people even nowadays, if I
tell them that I am an antenatalist, they're like,
What? What is that? And when I tell them
they're going, OK, let me go get the pitchfork
now because this is too much.
Yeah, uh, no, absolutely. I mean, you know, um,
as you well know, uh, you know, I mean,
it was not even a philosophical term until 2006.
So, you know, I was born in 1983, like,
you know, like, like many antenatalists, like we had
these thoughts and there was no word to support
it. And so it, it, it really, I didn't
find antenatalism in. Until, um, around 2010, I was
already sort of on YouTube. I was making in
a totally different part of YouTube. I was making
Twitter reviews. And, um, and all of a sudden
I found people like in Mendam and I found
derived Energy and, uh, Metamorph, who is Jim Crawford.
He's the, he was, he's the author of Confessions
of an Antenatalist. Um, AND they were all making
videos either. Uh, EXPLICITLY using this term anti-natalist or
anti-natalism, um, or just videos sort of around this
general idea that was at that point unnamed. Um,
AND it, it just was like so inspiring to
me. It was like I had found this idea,
this thing that I had been looking for my
entire life. It just crystallized so. Much. And so
that has continually propelled all kinds of creative and
academic interests that I've had moving forward. I just
think that antenatalism, uh, you know, I mean, the,
the crux of what was so attractive to me
was that it offered just this very beautiful, simple,
uh, I mean, whatever other, um, Uh, you know,
whatever else antenatalism is, whatever else the, the, uh,
the duties or whatever else it entails beyond just
what it is in its, its simplest form, you
know, it offers this very beautiful means of, of,
of of rejecting, uh, alleviating and ending suffering, which
is just to simply not create more lives. And
I, I just found that absolutely enchanting. And so
that was. You know, 16 years ago now, and
now I'm this, and um I've never stopped and
I've, I've, I've, I, I cannot even conceive of
losing interest in it. It's just uh it's the
most important idea in the world to me.
Yeah, it's the same to me. So I mean
you also asked me this question when you interviewed
me for your show, but I mean I think
it's a great question. So I also want to
ask you it. So what do you think are
the best arguments for anti-NATOism? I mean, if I
remember correctly, when you asked me that question, I
said that it's the risk argument. For me, because,
because it's like it's always a risk if you
bring someone new to this world that they're going
to suffer, so you shouldn't take that risk, but
I mean in your opinion. What are the best
and strongest arguments?
Yeah, I, I would concur. I really do think
that it is the risk argument that is the
strongest. I think they all have their own strengths
and weaknesses, you know. I think for, for, you
know, something like the Benatarian axiological asymmetry. It's extraordinarily
important. It's, uh, it communicates something, you know, especially
for people who are analytic philosophers. It's, you know,
it has all of this sort of weight to
it, um, you know, but it's a little too
complicated for most people to understand. The consent argument
really gets a lot of people. Into antenatalism. I
mean, it, it, it, it, it's the argument that
speaks to a great many people, but it sort
of does have, um, weaknesses in the sense that
sort of people get sort of lost and sort
of like, well, you know, you can't get consent
from a being that doesn't exist. So we're talking
about counterfactuals, and people get very sort of lost
in that. And so it's sort of for a
lot of people, it sort of loses its, its
steam. Um, THE quality of life. Which, you know,
you know, Benatar also proposes, you know, I think
is absolutely true and, and, and salient, you know,
but at the same time, people there are another
contingent of people who find that argument to be
very offensive because, you know, they can just come
back with like, well, my life is good, and
this is, you know, this is, this is a
ridiculous argument because it doesn't apply to me and
it doesn't apply to my family, it doesn't apply
to my children. Um, AND so, You know, the
risk is that one argument though that I think
does sort of pause, give people a little bit
of pause because it it people do understand the
general language of, of, of hazard. I mean, they
do understand, you know, risk is like a very
common language for people. It's, it's an argument that
I think a lot of people can absorb in
a in a in a fairly easy manner, and
I think it is the argument that Has the
most uh play as far as like usefulness to
antenatalist activism. I also really love the imposition argument.
The imposition argument can take a lot of different
forms, um, you know, Mati Hairi and I in
our book, you know, kind of, uh. Reformulated into
the idea of postnatal imposition. So we're no longer
talking about, you know, this, this act of bringing
people into existence. It's like, well, the imposition of
actually having to live a life and be, uh,
you know, have a natalist. You know, into a
natalist world and sort of have those expectations imposed
upon you. I think that's a very powerful argument.
So I think that there's an interesting toolbox and
some arguments work better for other people. I don't
think any of the arguments for antenatalism should be,
you know, lost, but I do think that there
is a need to find even better ones out
there because I don't think that we've necessarily found
like a truly effective argument to get people to
stop procreating. Yeah,
uh, but look, when it comes to, and I
imagine that I, I mean, you've been involved in
anti-Natalism longer than I have. I mean, I became
formally an anti-Natalist. I mean, I was already informally
an anti-Natalist well before that, but I, but I
came across the term and became officially an anti-Natalist
in 2017. That was when I read David Bennett's
book Never to Have Been. The first time, uh,
but and I imagine that over these years you
must have come across many different arguments against antenatalism,
right? So among all of them. Have you come
across arguments that you think or that, that you
really uh thought were hard to refute, and, and
if so, which were those arguments?
Um, I think that the arguments that I, I
mean, this is a really important question and it's
a difficult question to answer because I, I really
do think that anti-natalism can do. So much good
in the world, you know, um, but I also
think that there is something to the idea that
it, it, it, you know, brought to full fruition
or even halfway fruition. Like it might be too
difficult of a project, you know, for humanity, you
know, convincing all of humanity, um, you know, there
is sort of, um, I, I, I, I, I
think that arguments against its ultimate effectiveness, um. Those
are sort of difficult to dispel because I think
that there's some real truth to that. I mean,
when you, when you are an antenatalist activist, especially
if you're an extinctionist, I mean, there's, there's a
lot of limits to sort of, um, to how
far you can go convincing people, um, to how,
what your expectations are going to have to be
as far as like how successful this thing, um,
will be, uh, those are difficult to dispel. And
I think antenatalists, you know, we sort of, unfortunately,
Uh We, we sort of settle on sort of
somewhat magical thinking like, oh, there's gonna be this
red button or everybody is gonna agree and we're
just gonna like all go hand in hand silently
into that good night by not procreating. And like,
that's probably not gonna, gonna happen. You know what
I mean? That's, that's not reality. So I think
that arguments that um uh that point out, you
know, that um the effectiveness of antenatalism is, is,
is maybe Not as grounded as we would love
it to be. I mean, and again, taken to
its full fruition if we're, if we're really talking
about extinctionist antenatalism particularly sentio-centric antenatalism and beyond, um.
I, I, I think those are the real challenges.
Yeah, I don't know that they're insurmountable, but that's,
I think, where the real challenges for anti-natalism are,
yeah.
So let me ask you this because I've already
asked this question to several different people on the
show and not even just antenatalists. I've even asked
psychologists and other people. Yeah. I mean, in your
understanding, do you think that we have really evolved
an instinct? To reproduce, I mean, is that, is
that really what we have in our sort of
evolved psychology, or is, or is that, or is
that really not it, because I mean, in my
understanding, I'm going to tell you what I think
about the subject, and then you, you can comment
on it. I mean, So for me it's very
clear that we have evolved an instinct, if you
want to call it that way, to er feel
attracted sexually attracted to other people. I mean, since
we're, since we're talking about reproduction, I mean the
relevant thing is here is heterosexual sex. Of course,
but I mean to feel attracted to people of
the opposite sex and to have sex with them
from puberty onwards, particularly, I mean that kicks in
and it's universal, so I don't think we could
dispute that that's part of our evolved psychology, but
that's different than. AN instinct to to reproduce because
that's, that's like claiming that people actually want to
reproduce. No, they want to have sex and then
reproduction is sometimes the consequence of that and and
if they consciously would say that they want to
have kids, I think that the strongest. Argument there
it's that that's a cultural thing and not a
biological thing, because look, I mean, to be very
honest, I don't think that anyone is born or
even after puberty without them being told that it's
like that, that things work. I don't think that
anyone just spontaneously knows that if they have sex
they're going to have a baby. They have to
be told them,
right, right. I, I mean, I, I can't disagree
with any of that. That's, that's pretty much my
exact thinking too. I mean, we are biologically designed
to have sex drives and to, uh, uh, sire
and, and carry children. Um, THERE might be some.
Argument to there being some sort of like, you
know, our sort of drive to care for children.
There might be some sort of instinct there, I'm
sure, but no,
I think that yeah, but even caring for children,
I think it's more an after the fact. It's
after, for example, women get pregnant or even after
they have the children are born and that happens
for both men and women that that that instinct
for caring and protecting kicks in. It's not beforehand,
I think.
I think I. I think so too. Although I
mean, you know, I just to preface, as you
well know, I'm no evolutionary biologist or anything, but
that's what I, that's what I also suppose is
also going on. But I think, as you've, as
you've so eloquently said, I think that our, uh,
what is generally called the instinct to procreate is
really culturally built. I mean, we have, again, you
know, Monty and I talk about this in the
book that, you know, It's basically this sort of
panopticon-like imposition on children from the beginning of their
lives, you know, that they will grow up and
they will find meaning in procreation. And that's sort
of like, that's, that's your, that's your telos, right?
Like to be a procreator. Um, AND, um, and
that's very difficult sort of social programming to unthink,
you know, most people. Don't really kind of get
to that point where they even question that as,
as, as where their lives are sort of headed.
So I, I think all that is culturally built.
I think we have sex drives, and I think
nature sort of, uh, candies procreation in the form
of the orgasm, you know what I mean? And,
and we're so we're, we're, we're driving towards that,
but, um, but it tricks us. It's also producing
more of us through, through that mechanism.
Yeah, and and also I mean people can argue
that, oh yeah, but you look across societies and
all societies are pro-NATOist. Yeah, OK, but the issue
with that is if there ever were any anti-Natalist
societies, the thing is that I mean they just
went extinct. So you know, in the cultural evolutionary
race, unfortunately the ones that are more successful or
the only ones that are successful are the pro-Natalist
societies, right, because they keep having new members.
They keep having new members and all too often
pro-Nalism is driven by A politics of identity and
race and all of these other things. I mean,
Les Knight, who's the founder of the voluntary Human
Extinction Movement, he has this sort of great line
in an interview he did years ago, which is
just, and I'm I'm, it's a horrible paraphrase, but
it's something to the effect of like, maybe procreation
is racism in its most basic level, and I
think there's a lot of truth to that. So
yeah, I mean, a type will have sort of
a A cultural desire to perpetuate itself into the
future and, you know, compete with the rest, but
yeah,
I mean, I guess that's another obstacle to anti-Natalism,
right? It's just, I mean we have to be
very honest about this. If, if we, if we
created an anti-atalist society, I mean, competing with pro-Natalist
societies, we will always lose. That's just. Just, that's
just how it is because our society will go
extinct very quickly.
Yeah, I mean, you know, our, our, our choice
is to. You know, basically, I, I, I think
basically the, the. The way if we were to
actually get, I mean, anti-natalist activism, unfortunately is not
particularly serious about what it's trying to do, um,
you know, it hasn't been yet. I mean, with,
with, with the exception of a couple of people
who, who have, who have made some very strong
contributions, but I mean, if it wanted to get,
you know, very serious about um Becoming another, another
entity at the table that pro-natalism sits at, you
know, it has to advocate. A procreative freedoms of
all kinds, and it has to get really serious
about sort of making its stance accessible to future
generations. Like there will be more people, and we
sort of just have to be present. We have
to live. I mean, and keep the meme going
to know, to let the future generations know that
they do have this choice. There are really good
reasons not to. Uh, GO through with, um, the
meaning that their parents found in, in, in having
created, created them. Um, THERE'S, there's really good reasons
to make the choice not to take the choice
away from somebody else.
So look, what do you make of the pro-NATOist
movement, particularly the way we're seeing it right now
in the US? I mean, because in my understanding,
in my understanding, it's not just from our perspective
as anti-NATOists the immorality of bringing new people into
the world, but it's also the fact that This
is just my understanding, you can tell me if
I'm right or wrong here, but they're, they're also
contributing to undermining reproductive rights for women like access
to abortion, access to contraception, access to sexual, to
sex education and all of that, er, and, and,
and, and some of them, not all of them,
but some of them are actually associated with eugenics.
Oh yeah,
absolutely, because, because they're pushing for sort of racist
narrative. Oh we should all support white supremacy. It
should be American white people reproducing and not black
people, Hispanic people, Muslim people, or people from other
origins, right?
Yeah, no, I think you've got it 100% right.
I mean, first of all, for a A variety
of reasons worldwide. People seem to be procreating less
and less and less, and that has both government,
governmental interests and also just, just outright racist interests
just terrified because it's the it's the disappearance of
types and you know, we've got to perpetuate our
our cultural and racial identities into the future. And
so that The end of the pro-natalist movement is,
I find absolutely terrifying, and you know, I think
is making every move that it possibly can to
rule the world and set the tone for what
the future is going to be, and I think
it should be opposed, you know. In any way
possible. I think it's, I think it's absolutely disgusting.
I think eugenics is absolutely disgusting. If we're talking
about the pro-natalist movement as a rational movement towards
like reproductive freedoms, you know, access to abortion, I
mean, you know, because that's That's one end of
end of it, I think. Then I, I would
place myself firmly with them. I mean, I think
it's, it's good when anti-natalists can find a place
of having dialogue with pro-natalists, you know, to respect
people's autonomy, to have. Access to things like abortion
and whatever the case may be. I mean, I
believe people should have the right to make appropriate
choices, whatever they may be, and have access to
information. But yes, on the extreme other end of
it, you know, we're we're talking about. The worst
possible things imaginable, really. I mean, you know, we're
talking about, uh, so I, I don't know. I
mean, it's, it's, it's very scary here as far
as how loud, you know, I, I, I want
to say that when I first started in antenatalism.
Um, EVEN though, I mean, it's not like the
word pro-natalism or pro-natalist didn't exist. I mean, it's
an old term, but you wouldn't really hear it
as much. And in fact, like a lot of
times even when that was said, like people were
like, what, what antenatalists made up this term. And
for a little while, I actually kind of thought
that. I was like, you know, maybe, maybe we
kind of coined. It just as a counter to
to anti-natalism. But it's really, um, I, I would
say in the last like 3 or 4 years,
um, that term, that identity, you know, the, the
pro-natalist identity, uh, especially in a matter of what,
what the status of it is in other parts
of the world, but especially in America, um, it's
become frighteningly loud, as, um, you know, and, and,
um. Yeah, so it's, uh, it's, it's not, it's
not good. I'm not sure what else to say,
but it's, uh, yeah, it's very frightening.
Uh, LOOK, what do you think, er, could be
the consequences of anti-NATOism? I mean, do you think
that er Uh, of course, I, I guess this
is very unrealistic, but if everyone, uh, or most
of the population became anti-Natalists, do you think that
we could realistically go extinct?
I think we will go extinct. I mean, I
think that's, you know, whether anti-natalism has anything to
do,
but not, not through antenatal, not through
antenatalism. Look, I think, I think extinction cannot be
separated as part and parcel of antenatalism. I think
it is the consequence. I mean, well, there's plenty
of people trying to separate those two things, but
I mean, I, I don't think that it can
be. Uh, REMOVED as, as a, as a real,
as a, as a consequence of, of the doctrine
or whatever you want to call this thing, um,
but, uh What I, I actually, I mean, I,
I don't, I don't really know. I mean, you
know, part of my thinking currently is like, How
far is this, this new sort of radicalized pro-natalist
movement going to get, you know, and, and, and
what is that going to mean for the future
of anti-natalism? I mean, it, there is some evidence
that anti-natalism or anti-natalist-like thinking has kind of been
squashed in the past, um, you know, I mean.
The first crusade was against the Cathars who were,
you know, sort of, sort of proto antenatalists, you
know, the neo-Malthusians of France and other places were,
were, you know, done away with, you know, in
the, I think it was the 1800s, you know,
Marie's time. Um, SO is that going to happen
to us? I don't know. I mean, I really
don't know what, how far sort of this other
ever loudening voice is going to get and what
the reaction to is going to be. I mean,
right now in most places in the world, it's
still so unknown, you know, it's not a household.
Word, but even in places like Russia, you know,
you can be charged with, uh, I mean, again,
I don't know how familiar they are with the
term antenatalism per se, but there is, you know,
child-free propaganda, propagating ideas against having children can, I'm
not sure if it can carry with it jail
time, but I mean you can be fined, uh,
you know, you can be financially penalized. And so
I'm not sure how much. That is going to
be something that contemporary antenatalism faces as time goes
on. Um, WHAT I, I hope is that none
of that comes to pass. And, um, you know,
antenatalism as an academic, uh, subjects increases, that antenatalist,
antenatalist activism kind of gets more. Healthy and robust.
And at the very least, I would like to
see us organized to the point where, um, you
know, just information and antenatalism can be a lot
more sort of streamlined, accessible. We can be just
sort of a louder voice in society, and That
it can have. You know, right now, as far
as what it means or like what the expectations
can be, um, you know, I think it can,
it can, aside from personal choices not to procreate,
uh, you know, if you happen to be somebody
who's also a sentiocentric antenatalist and also has uh
You know, it can mean also going vegan and
things like that. So there's a lot of sort
of positive things in, in the antennatalist direction that
people can do. But I think the future of
it is a little uncertain. It's never looked brighter,
but at the same time it's also never looked
darker. So I'm not sure. Yeah,
yeah, you know what, this just came to my
mind now because I'm a socialist, and I think
that the people who should actually listen more to
Anti-Natalists are are the far left and even more
so the anarchists because there's a very, there's a
very good argument to be made that you should
look at pro-natalism as a form of oppression by
the state. I mean oppressing people or coercing people
into reproducing to create new. New workers if you
have a military project to create new soldiers or
future soldiers and basically to use you as, I
mean, a cannon fodder or to use you or
to use you as like cattle. So I mean
in what in whatever kind of state projects or
I mean it even doesn't necessarily be. It need
to be public projects. It can even be private
projects. I mean, then the state working in tandem
with capitalists and things like that to get to
have more workers to get lower wages and still
work for them for pennies or things like that,
because if you have a reduced number of people,
you have to pay them higher wages, for example,
so you know.
Yeah, no, I, I, I would say one of
the most positive things we could do is move
the conversation into arenas, political arenas, different philosophies, whatever
the case may be, that it just doesn't exist
yet. Um, I mean, the left is here in
America, at least, again, I can't really speak to
the rest of the world. It is so woefully
behind on issues like animal rights, like the right
to die, that I'm not really sure what chance
anti-natalism has, but I couldn't agree with you more,
you know, no.
Yeah, and when it comes to the extinction part,
I mean, as you were saying, I think you
were alluding to what I'm going to mention now,
but extinction, I mean, it's just going to happen.
It doesn't matter when it's, it's just going to
happen. It's inevitable because I mean it doesn't matter
if it's through climate change, it doesn't matter if
it's through a nuclear winter, it doesn't matter if
it's through AI going rogue or it doesn't matter
if it's through just pure biological evolution that will
evolve into other species and humans just cease to
exist eventually. Or I mean, if even if we
survive all of that, it's inevitable, at least according
to the predictions made by theoretical physicists, that we
will reach a point where even the universe itself
won't be able to sustain life anymore. So I
mean, it doesn't matter if we're talking 100 years
in the future, 1000 years in the future, it
could really. YEARS in the future, it's inevitable.
It's inevitable. I do think it matters how it
happens, and I think, I mean if if we
value suffering, we value sentience, we value manipulation, we,
you know, we, then it does matter how it
happens. And that's why I wish that people would
embrace it not only antenatalism, but more of a
like a more of a sort of an Engineered
extinction, like whatever, whatever ethical extinctionism can be. I
wish that was something of value because I think
that where the human race, we're sentience, where life
itself sort of sits now, yes, it will end,
and it's good that it will end, but it's
probably going to end really ugly and really badly,
uh, you know, over a long period of time
in which there's going to be tons of suffering.
I think even in the best sort of. Anti-natalist,
extinctionist. And engineered and I, I'm not sure if
we could expect that to be 100% suffering free.
I, I, I, I don't, I don't know that,
you know, especially, I mean, that's sort of the
subject of, um, my, my, my, my, uh, my
first solo author article that just got released, The
End of Sentience, whereas, you know, You know, even
if we sort of take the, the more um
Uh, You know, the route that's sort of like
hands off, you know, we might sort of be
committing our worst. ETHICAL, uh, misstep, you know, as,
as a, as a, as a human species of
like, you know, we have the power to do
something about the rest of sentience, um, but out
of fear that we might sort of impose our
will, we might allow them to suffer far greater
harms. But if we intervene, you know, then surely
there's going to be some sort of imposition of
harm there too. So we're in a very sort
of difficult bind, you know, um, none of that
may ever come to pass. But, but yeah, um,
I, I, I, I would, I would like to
see our species, value, um, a kinder extinction than
a, than a grosser. Nastier extinction, which I think
is unfortunately probably going to be the case.
Yeah, but the reason I mentioned that that it
is just inevitable is because, I mean, people who
think that we will ever be able to live
forever, I mean they're just delusional. That's just not
going to happen. No,
it's just not,
it's not on the table at all.
Yeah, no, I of course agree with you 100%.
We will not live forever, nor should we.
Yeah, so, let me ask you, because I know
that these are two different subjects, but I'm also
very interested, and I'm sort of, I mean sometimes
I dip my toes on that, but I'm also
very interested in the right to die movement, and
you're also part of it if I understand it
correctly, right? So, and this is interesting because for
example, if you have a David Bennett our approach
to anti-natalism. Uh, YOU would always consider death to
be a harm, right? Or at least generally speaking,
death is a harm. But do you think of
death as necessarily a harm?
No, I don't, um. I, I, I, I do
not take, uh, and, no, I, I, I don't
believe that. Um, SO I, I do believe that
a right to die should be seen as a
basic human right, you know, having access to medically
assisted, ending of one's life at the time of
their choosing. Unfortunately, I mean, even where, you know,
like right to die laws just came to Illinois,
where I am, um, but It, it's still so
woefully far behind. I mean, you have to be
in, uh, you know, terrible condition in order for
them to, uh, even consider, you know, offering that
piece, uh, to you. So I, I, I, I
don't, I actually have, I actually think that the
right to die movement is Even where it has
some successes, it's actually in worse shape than the
antenatalist movement, and I think it's actually far more
difficult than the antenatalist movement, uh, uh, than antenatalist
activism is. Um, YOU can be funny with antenatalism.
It's really hard to be funny with the right
to die. It's really, you know, and I think
there is potential for like a global. Right to
die movement. I think there's potential for even like
a youth movement with the right to die. I
mean, I, I've, I've, in my time on the
internet, I've met so many young people who can
very articulately, you know, describe why they should be
given this right to, uh, medical access to dying
or, or whether they should have the right to
end their lives. Um, AND unfortunately, you know, they,
they die. You know, I, I mean, I'm, I'm
not trying to be funny when I say that,
but I mean, although, you know, I mean, It
It, it's, I, I, I think that there's real
obstacles towards building like a truly effective, uh, movement
around the right to die. Um, I mean, I
hope I can be proven wrong on that. I
mean, obviously for elderly people, that's a whole other
contingent of people and there is like sort of
a healthy sort of movement for that, but, you
know, they don't want those people don't generally want,
you know, it to expand to. Uh, ACCOMMODATE, um,
younger people, people that have, uh, maybe mental health
conditions as opposed to, um. You know, like physically,
physical illnesses. Uh, I mean, obviously there's some inroads
here and there being made. There's literally made, um.
But, uh, but yeah, it's a, it's a troubled,
troubled, troubled movement. And, um, I, I, I have
to say it, it's, it's very difficult. I mean,
I, yes, I was, I was, um, deeply involved
at one point with uh some friends of mine
that we had a, we had an organ uh
sort of proto organization called the Right to No
Longer exist. And um, You know, I was very
proud of the work that we, that, well, I
really couldn't take much, much of any credit for
any of it, but I'm very proud of the
work that they did, uh, Kevin and Danny. Um,
Danny and unfortunately no longer with us, but Yeah,
I, I, I know, I know who you're talking
about. I know those guys.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, it's just all I mean
to say by bringing all that up is that
it really put me in touch with just how
difficult, uh, and how many obstacles there are to,
um. To even having this conversation with with the
people, I think people are much more receptive to
anti-natalism, you know, which, which is crazy to think
about, but yeah.
No, look, I have two different kinds of thoughts
about that. The first one is Yeah, I completely
understand why we as living organisms, we evolved to
fear death. I mean, yeah, yeah, that, I mean
that's just to be expected. If, if you didn't
fear death, our species would no longer be here.
So you know, but, but I mean, on the
other hand, I get that, but it's sometimes. People
cling to life in such dire circumstances that it,
it, it starts to feel morbid, that clingingness to
life starts to feel morbid because it's like it
doesn't even matter to them whatever kind of circumstances
you are in, you, you still have to be
kept alive. I mean, yeah, what, and and then.
So I think that we should, um, OK, fear
of death, fine, but we should teach people or
converse with people to try to make them more
accepting of death as just a natural phenomenon because
it is a natural phenomenon. Yeah,
absolutely.
I mean it's going to happen to every one
of us. It's just you can't avoid it unless
you are one of those mad guys who thinks
that transhumanism will make you live forever, and that's
just not going to happen because there are biological
limits, but you're going to die inevitably. Yeah, absolutely.
So I mean we have to take a more
Normal, we have to normalize thinking of death as
just something natural, something that happens, something that we
shouldn't just fight against to our last breath, I
mean, and and and then the other thing is.
This is my second point. I, I think, I
honestly think that, and I know that many people
will hate hearing this, but I think that people,
uh, the ones that should create and pass legislation
should be the ones who are affected by those
pieces of legislation. So for example, if you're talking
about abortion, it should be just women making that
decision. Full stop, because it's reproductive rights for women.
If we are talking about euthanasia, the right to
die, whatever, I mean, I honestly think that the
people who should make those decisions in terms of
legislation should be people who suffer the worst and
particularly from mental illness, because those are the ones.
That really understand very well the point, the point
you can reach in terms of suffering where life
is no longer worth living. And in this particular
case, why am I saying that those should be
the ones making the decision? Because If you pass
the legislation and er medically assisted death becomes legal,
I mean, no one is forced to er er
no one is forced to choose it. I mean,
you can choose it, you cannot choose it, you
can suffer whatever, you can do whatever, it's not
the state imposing death upon you. It's just a
choice. So, I mean, since it's a choice, I,
I think that it should be people who actually
reach the extreme end of suffering that should legislate
on that, you know, it's just my opinion.
Well, no, I, I appreciate you, you, you, you
saying that. I, I, I, I. I would at
least say that people who actually, you know, people
who suffer from, uh, people who want the right
to die, um, should definitely, and, you know, in
terms, or, or women in, in terms of abortion
should at least be a part of the conversation
when these laws are passed. I mean, all too
often, it's, uh, it's one or the other, or,
or it's it's all men or it's all, you
know, uh, religious, um. Factors to sell it, yeah,
you know, who have a say in these things.
So it's not, you're never really getting with a
lot of these kinds of debates, you're never really
getting the full gamut of the arguments where it's
always sort of on extremes. Um, I mean, look,
I, I don't think that people who, you know,
people who are a little weary of the right
to die, you know, as far as like, um,
People who are afraid of people getting coerced into
it, you know, people with disabilities who are like
afraid that decisions are going to be made, uh,
you know, surrogate decisions are going to be made,
you know, against their interests and against their will
to live. I, I, I don't think that those
are stupid concerns. I mean, I, I, I unfortunately
do think that there does need to be some
kind of safeguards to make sure that. You know,
people who want this can get it, and people
who don't want it are not forced into it
in any kind of way and, you know, but
unfortunately what happens now is, is. The will, the,
the desire to end one's life is sort of
like never the right answer for, for, for, for
a lot of, uh, people in the medical profession.
Like people can be pretty explicit that that's what
they want, and, uh, it's just sort of, yeah,
it's just sort of never the right answer. And,
um, yeah, it, it, it, it's, it's, uh, yeah,
go ahead, sorry, no,
look, look, look, I hear, I, I, I hear
you. I'm, I mean it. It was a phenomenal
conversation, but on May 20th, I'm going to release
on my channel a 3 hour 40 minute. The
discussion with the psychiatrist just on that topic, and
I mean we had to go we had to
go through 3 hours and 40 minutes of discussion.
Yeah, I mean and I I I I mean
I'm not, I'm not saying anything here against him.
He's a he's a great guy. It's it's not
a criticism or anything like that, but I mean
it's just to say that it's that hard to
get into a. Conversation with even a psychiatrist about
that.
I mean, because,
because they're just trying to, OK, we should save
people in whatever circumstances, and, and the correct answer
is always prolonged life, prolonged life, prolonged
life. It's always flourishing. It's always, no, I, I,
if I, if I may say, I don't want
to get into too many specifics, but like I,
I've, I've been a graduate student at the University
of Chicago over the last. Nine-ish months. And, um,
and during that time, I've, you know, I've, I've
talked to a lot of doctors and bioethicists and,
you know, who take a very negative view of
the right to die. Um, AND some of the,
and I, I again, I can't get into too
many specifics, but it's like, sure, I've really, it's
really been a challenge for me to Kind of
like, calm down, hear what they have to say,
because I'm so on the other side of it.
Like I really do believe that this needs to
be a human right. And, you know, doctors kind
of need to get out of the way, just
let people go. Um, BUT some of the time,
some of what they have to say is salient,
you know, um, and it's, it's, it's very complicated.
Um, AND it, like I said, I think that.
I would love to see a real, uh, sort
of like an international right to die movement kind
of spring up that is very articulate and can
really sort of make the argument for a more
universalized right to die, um, but I think we're
very far away from that.
And you know, one thing in that discussion, one
thing that we discussed. And he agreed with me,
he agreed with me on that, is that, I
mean, if you have a legal access to medically
assisted death, I mean it should be a decision
that is made between the patient and the doctor,
and no one else should interfere with it. I
mean, because I mean there. There was this case,
I don't know if you got across it, but
it was all over the internet and the news
in back in March, the case of Noelia Castillo,
that girl, that 25-year-old girl from Spain who got
access to euthanasia there, and basically, I mean, it
was, it was just sick, of course, not her
decision. I'm not saying that her decision was. It
was a bad decision. What was sick there was
the fact that her father, who had even abandoned
her, tried to interfere legally with her having access
to that. And also in the last few hours
before she got access to it when it just
exploded over the internet. And the news, I mean
there were famous people and the damn Catholic Church
trying to convince her to not go ahead with
it and condemning her decision. I, I, I mean
just. Just leave people alone, man. If they are,
if they have been followed by medical professionals, by
psychiatrists for I don't know how many years, and,
and they decided consciously that that's the best decision
for them, just leave them alone, man. Yeah,
yeah, absolutely. Well, I think like, you know, it
would be very helpful if we could declare. You
know, our interests in the, in the right, you
know, if that could be sort of part of
our, our end of life planning, you know, you
know, our desires known from as early a point
in our life as possible.
Yeah, I don't know if you, I don't know
if you have that in the United States, but
here in Portugal we have sort of a OK,
the direct translation would be vital will, where basically
we write down or select in a formal document
all the medical interventions that we allow people to
do on us if we are found, for example,
if for example, we don't want to get resuscitated,
we can have that document validated and so if
we're found just not breathing, they can do anything
about that.
We have something similar here, but I think it
does get complicated because like You know, you can
have a DNR. You can have an advanced directive,
but if you're unable to. Uh, COMMUNICATE. Like if
you're in, if you're, you know, sick enough, you're
in a coma, you're in some sort of medical,
medical state to where you can't advocate for yourself.
And, you know, even if you have this sort
of documentation, I mean, maybe like you're in a,
you have, and, and you've, you've, you know, you
have surrogates who can sort of advocate for you,
but you're You know, you have some sort of
condition that can be like, uh, you know, it,
it, where somebody in, in that sort of circle
can sort of see your condition is not a
big deal. Like we can just administer this little
thing and they'll they'll have 2 more years, you
know, to live. And even though we've made sort
of these advanced directives, that sort of like possibility
of um Excess of life or flourishing, like, you
know, I, I think sometimes even these, these guardrails
or steps that we as individuals put in place
to prevent, um, you know, more life kind of
get ignored or, or, you know, there's, there's just
sort of this. The sense that I got, you
know, over the last, again, over the last 9
months speaking to the people that I've spoken to
is that they will find any way possible for
it, um, you know, if they can, uh, legally
and, and, and, and, and morally, you know, to
keep you alive no matter what. And it's, it's
really, really troubling. I mean, the, the, the part
of it that I think is Really difficult is
like, you know, the, the argument that, uh, that
a lot of, um, people with severe disabilities make
where it's sort of like, you know, nobody should
have the right to die because I'm in this
position. I could be sort of coerced through various
mechanisms to, uh, for my life to be ended.
What I need is care. You know, I need,
I need access to these services, like, you know,
or, or. There's a lot of other, I, I've
heard sort of, uh, policymakers sort of make the,
the argument that it's like, well, it's not that
these people need the right to die, it's that
they need society to be different, you know, they
need, uh, the, the, the economy needs to be
better, they, you know, but it's like, there needs
to be a stronger voice on the other side.
Uh, THAT has good salient counters to these arguments.
Not that those salient counters to those arguments don't
exist, but there needs to be somebody out there
making those arguments that it's like you shouldn't, you
can't make people wait for for life to improve
before you just allow, like allow them to have
this human right to say, I don't want to
do this anymore.
Yeah, and and you know, and you know, sometimes
it's just disgusting because Everyone knows that a particular
person's life is not going to get better. I
mean, they know. There's
that too.
They know it.
There's magical thinking involved and there's all kinds of
unrealistic thinking. Yes, it's true. And there's no will
to say that, you know, yeah, to make that
explicit. I'm sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you,
but yeah, I agree with you.
So let me ask you this, because last year
I've had on the show Dr. Philip Nitschke. He's
he's a very interesting figure. You're aware of him.
Absolutely, and congratulations. Get him on the show,
yeah, yeah, yeah, and I mean he says that
in his opinion there should only be two criteria
for people to get access to drugs for them
to basically get access to assisted suicide, so The
first one is for them to be of age,
so over 18 years old or 21, whatever the
case, and the other one is for them to
have mental capacity. I mean that term mental capacity,
we can discuss it to our graves and we'll
probably never. Get a consensus on that because it
also involves, or at least to some people it
involves not being internally coerced and that that internal
coercion, you know, it would exclude in principle everyone
that suffers from mental illness, but I mean, you
know, it's a tough one. Yeah, so, but but
I mean that anyone who fulfills those two criteria
should just be given if they want a drug
to take home and if they decide to take
it, they take it. If they decide they don't
want to take it, they don't take it. I
mean, what do you think of that? Do you,
does that strike you as as reasonable or
So he's advocating that just sort of everybody be
be given their, their
pill in their pocket if they ask for it
if they
if they ask for it. I mean, yeah, I
mean, I, I, I, I, I, I think I'm
mostly on board with that, um. You know, I,
I, I'm, I'm sort of at a point where
I'm, I'm not sure, I'm not sure how I
feel about The right to die existing outside of
sort of like medical assistance in dying and just
like generalized access like should people have, uh, should
people be able to go to a Walgreens or
a CVS or something like that and just like,
I don't know, talk to a nurse and then
just like be able, I mean. My heart says
yes, my, uh, but there's another part of me
that's like a little bit. Worried about misuse if
it's that I don't know. I, I, I'm, I'm
just a little cautious about, uh,
yeah, but you know, but you know something funny,
a few decades ago, I'm not sure if you
could do that during the far right dictatorship we
had here in Portugal up till 1974. I'm not
sure about that, but at least up until a
few decades ago. You could go to a pharmacy
here in Portugal and buy cyanide. Oh wow, it
was just available. So wow, and you, and you
know what someone can do with cyanide, right? Well,
you can kill other people with cyanide, so that's,
that's, yeah, yeah, yeah, but also yourself,
right? Well, right, right, right. So, uh, yeah, I
mean, access to whatever I. I do worry about
it, just the bad actors who do want to
use it on other people. So there's that, that,
uh, which I don't, you know, that, that might
be very rare instances of that occurring. I don't
know. But I mean, there is that concern. Um,
BUT also, I just don't know about doing that
without medical assistance. Like you should probably. There does
seem like there's A huge potential to have a
very poor end, uh, doing that on one's own.
I, I, I don't know. But at the same
time, people should have The right to choose that
if they, if they want, uh, it, it's a
little complicated. I, I, I feel like there's A
greater sort of argument to be one that, you
know, the medical industry doesn't seem to think that.
Death is also part of the medical responsibility that
it's not just the perpetuation of life, that it's
also the administering of death, whether it's, um, I
mean, in, in, in, in, um. In the thesis
that I'm working on that I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm
going to be, I'm going to be turning in
by Monday, um, you know, part of it sort
of talks about the need for um another kind
of bioethics, a bioethics that can like accommodate things
like euthanasia and abortion and Um, you know, this
has kind of been, there, there's various philosophers that
have, have kind of commented on this, Mati being
one of them, Julio Cabrera being another, uh, um,
uh, another philosopher by the name of Konrad Sochik.
I, I think it's how you pronounce his last
name, um, and there was another philosopher that kind
of coined this term of thanatos ethics, and there
seems like there's a greater Battle to be won
for that to, you know, be like a, a,
a, a strong robust voice in medical ethics, um,
that, you know, uh uh uh uh the, the
creation of bioethics that can accommodate, um, these arguments
and these necessary actions, um, and that, that, that
bioethics isn't only, and medical ethics isn't only for
the, uh, perpetuation and flourishing of life. And so
I, I, I, I. At this particular period of
time, it's like that's, that's, that's the kind of
right to die that I wanna see. I wanna,
I want people to, I wanna see, you know,
the right to die should be like anything else.
Like I, if, if, if you have a, if
you need To have surgery, you should have the
right to anesthesia. You know, if you need to
die, you know, you should be able to go
to a doctor, you know, and you should be
able to plan the rest of your life. It,
it, it, I mean, like you, like you were
talking about, you know, it's, it's, um, you were,
you were saying how, uh, you know, death needs
to be seen more as a part of life.
And, um, you know, and, and in that sense,
I mean, like if, if we had Real medical
access to dying, um, then. You could plan for
your life in a, in a completely different way
than we're allowed to now. Um, AND I, I
would really love to see that happen. So, uh,
so, so yes, it would be, it would be
great, it would be really great if, if you
had the level of access to where there were
just sort of like no questions and you could
just go out and get it. In a, in
a, it's hard for me to absolutely put my
foot down and say, no, I wouldn't want to
see that because I, I do think that ultimately
people have a right to it. But, um, but
I would, I would like to see this sort
of greater battle against, uh, Against euthanasia, uh, prevail.
Like I, I would like to see it succeed
in this sort of big way that I think,
um, people have been moving towards for, uh, for,
for decades now.
Yeah, so I mean, do you think, I'm not
saying that this would ever be practically feasible, but
just theoretically that there, there would be or there
could be any circumstances somewhere in the future where
if people would be able to eliminate as much
suffering as possible from human existence, that it would
make it. MORAL to bring new people into the
world. I mean, like I don't know, like through
transhumanism or something like that.
Oh. So you're talking about like, like if a
mechanism of, of transhumanism came to pass and we
could eliminate huge amounts of suffering that way, um,
so I, I don't think. It, it's a trade-off,
right? Like, uh, like we already had, like, you
know, there's plenty of things we do in the
medical profession that are sort of transhumanistic, right? Like
they prolong life, they're, it's a, they're, they're, yeah,
they're, they're, they're, uh. Uh, BIO-ENHANCING, enhancing one's ability
to survive disease or disability or everything. And that's
great. So a lot of those things I couldn't
possibly say no to. Like once people are here,
like, I do think that that making people's lives
good is fantastic. Like, let's do it, let's do
all of those things. Um. I don't know that,
like if we're talking about, uh, I mean, this
is. You'll have to pardon me, Ricardo, you know,
like there's this question's a little bit abstract. So
if we're talking about something like, uh, like, like
David Pierce's antenatalism, where,
yeah, yeah, he is one of the people I
was thinking of, yeah,
yeah, I had, I had, I had a feeling
that was the direction you're going in. Like, so
if we could eliminate all suffering. And that would,
you know, in, in his view, that would mean
that procreation was now, uh, permissible and free of
ethical. Issue. I, I wouldn't agree with that. Like,
yes, there's no suffering, but there's still, there's still
manipulation. There's still creating needs for no needs. There's
still, they're still, um, they're still imposing one will
over another, and I think that's still fundamentally wrong.
Um, AND so I, I, I don't think that,
I think that I can't imagine that even in
the absence of suffering, uh, creating lives, um. It
is completely free from all ethical and moral infraction.
Yeah, and look, I mean when people hear what
I'm about to say they might think that I'm
making an argument for suffering, but not at all.
It's not at all that kind of argument that
I'm making, but I think that people also Or
at least people who think that we can eliminate
all suffering, many times they underestimate how boring life
could get, and boredom would also be a form
of torment, if you will,
so yeah. Well, I mean, I, I, yeah, I
think, I, I, I think about that. I, I
think that's absolutely true. I also, I mean, one
of the most fascinating aspects of, of David Pierce's
proposal, uh, for me is just the Idea of
like how. The app, like what would be perceived
in the absence of a circumstance that would normally
cause suffering. So if you're, if you're Let's say
there's no suffering, but there's still some kind of
totalitarianism, and these totalitarian entities create some sort of
atrocity like I almost I mean, you, would you
somehow not be able to perceive that as like
a bad thing? Like, I, it, it's like, I
can't, it's, it's hard to kind of wrap my
brain around. Uh How people would sort of move
through these experiences, uh, with suffering being a muted
element, but there's still something not good taking place,
you know what I mean? It's like, so I,
I, I, I just don't know. I don't, I
don't, I don't, I don't know how to articulate
it in exactly the right way, but that's, that's
something that I think about a lot insofar as,
as his, uh, his proposal, at least. I, I'm
less familiar with, with Perhaps a lot of other
transhumanists, you know, thinkers that would maybe uh propose
something. But yeah, I think, I think transhumanism is
a mixed bag. Like, I, I think it, it,
uh, big picture transhumanism, uh, uh, uh, you know,
as far as, uh, uh, a far futurism, um,
I, I, I think it's, I think it's just
as fraught with, um, ethical violations as, as natalism,
you know, uh, to, to a large degree. But
there are also elements of it, um, that I
think people need and are good. And so, yeah,
it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, uh, my current thinking
on transhumanism is that it's, it's a complicated conundrum.
The thing, yeah,
no, and I mean for sure there are at
least parts of it. I'm not even claiming that
it's mainstream transhumanism or most of transhumanism out there,
but there are elements of it that connect also
to to eugenics. Oh,
absolutely, yeah, there's, there's that for sure, yeah.
Yeah, it's, it's like, oh my God, we're going
to create a superior human race or something like
that by eliminating certain undesirable traits.
I, I, I think, I think transhumanism is, is,
is very vulnerable to that kind of thinking and
that kind of application, and I, and, and some
of the transhumanists that I've talked to, and I've,
David Pierce not included, but seem to be sort
of Unaware of that, unaware of what could go
wrong. And, uh, actually, that's part of, that's part
of what frightens me the most about transhumanism is
that a lot of transhumanists that I've spoken to
are not, are not pessimistic enough about what could,
what could go wrong, you know, it's a, there's
a lot of beautiful ideas there, but not enough
appreciation for how ugly it could be.
Yeah, and then you also get that beautiful, beautiful
mix of people who are pro-natalist, transhumanist eugenicists.
Yeah, yeah, 100%, yeah, it's, it's not a good
mix. It's not a good salad.
Yeah, so look, earlier you mentioned just in passage
that things like sentio-centric anti-atalism, I mean, are you
a proponent of that? Do you extend your anti-atalism
to all sentient beings?
Absolutely, yeah, I, I, I. My origin story as
an antenatalist is as a sentio-centric antenatalist. I remain
a Sentio-centric antenatalist. Um, AND I, you know, part
of the work that I've been, that I've been
doing in my, in my current, uh, graduate thesis
is the idea of like what is beyond Sentio-centric
antenatalism, exploring the idea of biocentric antenatalism. Um, AND
that's sort of like what informs that, uh, inquiry
is sort of this, you know, this, this thing
that David Benatar says about his, his own Benatarian
antenatalism, that it is theory neutral, that it can
extend to all sort of normative theories, axiological basiss,
and so, Um, I've done a lot of work
over the last couple of months of like analyzing
what a biocentric antenatalism could look like, um, you
know, what it, you know, could antenatalism be formulated
in sort of like an Aristotelian or Aristotelian kind
of camp. Um, AND, uh, uh, and that's, uh,
yielded some very interesting. Possibilities, some very creative possibilities,
some possibilities that could possibly, probably never come to
be. But, um, but yeah, I mean, I think,
I think, uh, I think sentience is like the
biggest problem in the world, right? Like, it, it
is the seat of we're all suffering lives and
suffering is, is, to me, where all the, all
or a great portion of the value really is.
Um, BUT then, you know, uh, part of the
proposal. THAT I've made is that even, even in
sentient life, even though it, it is spared the
blight of suffering, all living things are blighted by
needs. So even insentience can have the condition of
neediance, as I, as I've coined it. And you
know, so I think that's another sort of basis
for, um, like an all life antenatalism that could,
could emerge.
Yeah, you know what, I think that we as
antenatalists should create our own origin story and sentience
would be the original sin.
Yeah, yeah, for sure, for sure,
which is, which is funny because I mean when
you talk to many, I mean, I'm not sure
if many, but at least some Christians, they like,
I mean if they don't, even if they don't
say that out loud. They, they, they're basically admitting
that this life here is crap and they're waiting
for a better life in the in the year
after. So yeah,
no, absolutely, I mean there there's, there is a,
there is absolutely a this world is not good
enough and you know, you know, the real, the
real joy. Exists in the year after and yeah,
so they've kind of got it on one level.
They just, you know, and, and certainly some You
know, there are, as you well know, I mean,
there is, there is, there is such a thing
as Christian antenatalism, so you know, it's like it's
not possible for them to get there. So yeah.
Yeah, but I mean I would imagine that particularly
nowadays in the US, if someone were to find
some passage in the New Testament where Jesus, where
something that Jesus said could be interpreted as anti-atalist,
they would say, I don't support Jesus, he's woke.
That's what that's, that's, that's a woke narrative. I
mean, because I know it.
Uh SORRY, I didn't mean to interrupt you, Ricardo,
but I, I, I,
I was, I was just going to say that
it's funny because actually in recent times there are
religious figures in the US, uh, basically when they
are confronted with some, uh, sayings. By Jesus, they,
they basically accused Jesus of being
woke, of being woke. Yeah, I was just, I
apologize for interrupting you, but I was basically just
going to say exactly what you just said and
agree with you that like I think that a
great deal of the contemporary Christian. You know, American
movement is like as far away from the vision
of Jesus as it could possibly get. I mean,
you know, it's it's this sort of militant. You
know, hate, hate machine, you know, as opposed to
acceptance and love and all, all that, all that
woke hippie, hippie stuff, yeah.
OK, so look, talking about, uh, conservative the the
conservative right in America, in America, uh, no, no,
no, no, OK, I, I know, I know what
you're expecting, but I still have one question before
before that, but uh. Do you think that antenatalism
itself would have anything to say about the ethics
of abortion? I mean, I'm always thinking about this
because uh I mean pregnancy is the mechanism through
which you bring new life into the world, right?
So I mean abortion, we're talking about humans here,
so. But I mean, because that's the case, do
you think that there could be something from anti-atalism
that we could apply to the ethics of abortion?
100%. So I think that the interest abortion is
like a fascinating subject within antenatalism in my opinion,
because the the Um, the opinions from antenatalist philosophers,
um, on abortion really like runs the full gamut,
um, you know, from, from every extreme. So, uh,
famously, Julio Cabrera, who's like a, a Kantian antenatalist,
you know, he's against abortion. I mean, not to
the extent that he would like take it away
as a right from women, but like, ethically, he
believes that it, it is. A manipulation of this
new being. Like it was a manipulation to conceive
the being in the first place, but to end
their life through abortion is also like a violation.
And it's, it's, it's something that, you know, he
thinks anonatalists should really take seriously. David Benatar, and,
and, and let me just preface this by saying
this is everything that I am attributing to each
of these philosophers, a gross paraphrase. So I I
very much encourage people to go out and like
see what they've actually said,
but yeah, I'm also one of those people that
I never memorize specific quotes.
I'm
always paraphrasing
and no matter how much I, you know, preemptively
practice, you know, the quotes, I always seem to
get them wrong. So, so yeah, so it's necessary
to make that clear. But, but David Benatar also
famous, I think it's before 2018. Weeks, he says
that there is a moral sort of, uh, I
don't know whether he uses the word imperative, but
that it's, let's just say it's perfectly fine, even,
even morally ethically recommended to abort the fetus. After
that point, he places sort of, I think the
heartbeat as a sign of an interest to survive
and that not that we would never, it's never
ethically permissible to Um, to have an abortion at
that point, but it's like really something that we
should take seriously though. Again, we're making, you know,
he, again, he believes death is bad, so it's
bad to impose, it's bad to impose life, but
it's also bad to impose death on that, you
know, that gestating entity. Um, THEN you have Monty
Hari, who, who, who, um, you know, uh, famously
in Uh, his, his master's thesis in 1984 was
an absolutely permissible view on abortion. So, you know,
that so long as the woman desires to have
an abortion really at any stage, that it should
be granted, that there's, there's no, um, that it's
a violation of her personhood, basically to deny a
woman an abortion. So, so again, so I think
that the Um That's a, that's a huge spectrum
of opinion from, you know, three of the, 3
of the most important antenatalist philosophers. Um, IT'S interesting
that when the topic is brought up sort of
within whatever the antenatalist community is, there's sort of
this desire to separate abortion from antenatalism, like they
have nothing to do with one another. But um
I think that's clearly not true. I think there's
huge inroads. It's definitely something that Uh, could be
a part of antenatalist activism, and I think probably
should, um. So yeah, so I, I, I think
there's a, a great abundance of connection and things
that, that, um, yeah.
OK, let's finally get into the juicy stuff here.
The juicy stuff. Yeah, I, I left it for
last because I want to force people to watch
the entire. Sure, sure, sure,
yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah, because if I, if I. Came up with
this right at the beginning, they would stop watching
after 10 minutes, so you know, so your debate
with Rachel Wilson, yeah,
yeah.
Look, look. I have to tell you, I mean,
I've already told you via email, but it was
just, I was expecting it, but because I was
already familiar with the debating style of Rachel Wilson
and her husband Andrew Wilson, it's always the same
kind of crap. And uh I was already expecting
it, but it doesn't matter how many times I'm
expecting it, it, it's always frustrating because er those
guys always completely ruin every debate and. They're like
the pigeon playing chess, you know, they're like the
pigeon playing chess. They go all over the board.
They ruin all the places where the pieces were
on, and, oh, I won.
I
won that check,
check.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but, but, but I, but I
mean, tell us about your experience.
Yeah, so, uh, I regret doing it. Um, I,
I, I was familiar with both of them previously.
I sort of knew what to expect. I did
read Rachel's book, um, so I should,
oh my God, you read her.
I did. I did read her book.
Oh my God, Jesus,
yeah, it was a rough one. So I mean,
I sort of knew what to expect, um. At
the same time. You know, I didn't like, I
didn't expect him to go so low as to
like. I don't know. They went into a lot
of territory that I thought was just, just absolutely
gross. Um, AND, and a little threatening. I mean,
like, you know, their, their whole thing is like
they're raising funds to buy more guns and so
it's like, and they have this massive audience who
like Yeah, uh, yeah, so it was, it was,
it was awful. It was a terrible experience. I,
I, I love doing interviews and, and I, I
typically say yes when I'm, when I'm offered one.
I mean, you know, and so, um, and I,
and I consider it like my Just part of
what I do, like part of my charge as
an antenatalist. If somebody wants to talk about it,
I'm, you know, that's what I'm here for. Um,
SO on, on, on that, you know, it, it,
it was, it was, uh, it was one of
those experiences where I'm glad I did it in
the sense that. I got a real window into
like the true face of, of like what I'm
up against, you know, because I had, I had
never quite experienced that, you know, um, and, uh,
but I, I, I, I, I have to be
honest, I mean, I, I found the whole thing
by the end to be just deeply depressing. Um,
I, I did, I did receive a lot of
very Lovely sort of uh feedback afterwards. Um, I,
I, I tried my best not to get too
angry. I tried not to get too sort of
Belligerent. I, I, I, I, I did the best
I could. You know what I mean? But uh,
at a certain level, I'm just not, there was
a time in my life where I was, I
was more Aggressive sort of on the internet. Like
I would have been much more prone to be,
you know, getting into a screaming match with people,
you know, in, in, in, in such a, in
such an arena. And I'm just, uh, I'm just
too old for that now. And I just, I'm,
I don't know. I, I just can't do it
anymore. So, um, I wonder if there's anything that
I could have said that would have made any
kind of dent, you know, and I, I don't,
I don't think so. And I, and I think
part of it is not, is not simply the,
the rhetoric and the The competing philosophies, you know,
that I was up against, but it's also the
audience backing them up. It's, it's the, it's just,
it's just such a, it's such, such a nasty
echo chamber of hate.
No, no, look, I'm going to say just this
one thing because this is something that when the
debate gets to that point, I never heard anyone
using this argument against them. And I think that
someone in the future should try. I know that
they're going to, they're going to use the same
MO, the same modus operandi, and they're going to
just shit all over the board and win the
debate anyways, but because they're always trying to do
this, always in all their debates. It doesn't matter
the topic, they're always. Trying to bring it down
to, OK, so, ah, do you believe in logic?
Do you believe in mathematics? Where does logic come
from? Oh, it has, it has to be God.
It has to be God. If it's not God,
then explain where it comes from. And look, and
look, I think that someone at that point should
tell them, look, have you ever heard of idealism?
Have you ever heard of that position in philosophy,
because there's actually idealists out there that do not
believe in God, and they're like they, they believe
in ideas, but they do not believe in God.
So you're just making a God of the gaps
kind of argument there. You're just, you're just, oh,
logic, God. It's like, oh, logic exists, God. No,
there are alternatives to that. There are also, there
are also materialist alternatives to that, but you you
don't even need to get into the materialism because
they just reject materialism. Uh THE the the Wilson's
reject materialism in terms of, in terms of their
epistemology. So, but, but, but there there's idealism. And
you don't need God to to have idealism.
Well, Ricardo, you know, uh, if you want, I
bet you anything, if you want to propose a
debate with them, they'll, they'll be happy, and you
can, you can tell them that. You could be
the next in line. Please don't. Please don't. Don't
do it. No, I, I, no, I, I, um,
that might work. I mean, the, but the, you
know, the fact of the matter, I mean, that's
a great argument, and, and I think that if,
if they were. More honest interlocutor, I always have
a problem with that word. But I mean, if
they were, if they were truly interested in the
truth, if they were truly interested in, in, in,
in, in real philosophical debate, I think that that
argument would have um some real legs. But, you
know, I mean, Anytime I thought I was bringing
up a fairly good point, they'd ask me questions
like, Are you gay? You know, I mean, that,
that's the kind of like shit we're dealing with,
or like, why don't, you know, you know, then
of course it, it's, uh, at some point they
got into the, you know, why, you know, why
don't you just kill yourself or, you know, what,
what, uh, You know, it got really, it got
really nasty, so I, I just. I don't think
there's any real way of winning with, with a
crowd like that, because they're, they're, it's just, it's
just designed for them to always win.
Yeah, no, and look, I've listened to debates where
they're debating morality with other people, and it's always
the same shit. It's always, oh, there are objective
moral values, God. If you don't think that there
are objective moral values, then everything is subjective, then
I, then I'm right. And I'm like, and I'm
like, if I were to debate with them, I
would be like, look. I can explain to you
where human moral values come from through evolutionary theory
plus cultural evolution plus ecology. And I'm going to
explain that to you. Step by step. If by
the end of it you think that your BS
God argument has more evidence to it than all
of these, then you're a BS artist.
That's what you are, yeah, yeah, 100%, but that
is what they are, so, yeah, yeah, I, I,
I, I. You know, like, on one hand, I'm
proud of myself that I did it. On the
other hand, I wish I had not. So it,
uh, it, it, it, I will admit it took
me a little while to kind of come back
from it because I really had wanted, I really
wanted it to go well. And, uh, it was,
yeah, it was a real challenge to say the
least.
Yeah, OK, so one last question then, and this
one, this one I have to ask you because
I mean I really need to know if in
your, I don't know how many years of anti-Natalism
if you ever came across such a BS counterargument
to anti-NATalism because this was a first for me.
This was a first time I had never heard
such bullshit. My entire life. It was like back
in November I was on Facebook talking about eugenics,
I mean criticizing eugenics, and the guy came on
arguing against me and saying, because he knew I
was an anti-Natalist and saying, oh, but you're an
anti-atalist, you're also promoting eugenics, right? And I and
and I was like, What the damn heck have
I just done? What, what is the look. You
don't know what eugenics is and you don't know
what antenatalism is. If you were to make such
a claim, you're a complete dumb ass. First off,
first off, we've already talked about eugenics here. Eugenics
is about selecting particular kinds of traits that you
consider to be good or acceptable or ideal and
trying to Eliminate bad traits. That's basically eugenics. Anten-atalism
is like it's immoral, immoral for you to reproduce.
It doesn't matter your traits if you're white, black,
tall, short. It doesn't, that doesn't matter at all.
So there's no link at all, at all between
eugenics and antenatalism. And then, and then he he
like he said that. He said that I would
like to see eugenics promoted politically. And I was
like, look, when have I ever said that BS
and name me 11 anti-atalist out there who's involved
in trying to make anti-atalist policies. Name me one.
Name me one. And the eugenicists are always trying
to do that, involve themselves in. Eugenicist policies, namely
one anti-atalist who's out there trying to, oh no,
no, I'm going to force legislation to prevent everyone
from reproducing.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, no, no, I, I, so
I was looking forward to this question because the
answer is actually a little more complicated than you
might think. So let's, so this is a bit
of a, bit of a history lesson. So as,
as you probably. You probably already know a lot
of these little, little particulars, but, uh, but just
for the benefit of, of our audience. So David
Benatar and Theophi de Gre in 2006 coined antenatalism
as a philosophical term. So that is the advent
of antenatalism as we know it has nothing to
do with eugenics whatsoever. Um, AND, you know, as
far as it's uh, like actual Political movements that
have come out of contemporary philosophically informed anti-natalism. There
has been very, very little of that. There was
actually an antenatalist party in the UK, um, and
they, they were around for a very, very short
period of time. It was initiated by Uh, a
YouTuber, I'm not going to say his real name
because I don't, I don't, I don't know whether
he's still around or not, but he, his, his
YouTube channel was called Self Immolator, and he was
a British antenatalist. And there was also, he had
some sort of partnership with Glennos, who Some people
watching might be familiar with you. He was sort
of very well known for making antenatal cartoons, and
so they, they, the party didn't last very long,
but there was like a couple of radio interviews.
They didn't participate in any elections. There was no
As far as I know, they didn't get to
the point where they were creating, uh, proposals for
policies or anything, but certainly what they were doing
was informed by, uh, contemporary antenatalism and had nothing
to do with eugenics. But I think that, uh,
that one thing that antenatalists really should, it's a
piece of antenatalist history that is not particularly well.
Uh, KNOWN or understood is the history of antenatalism
prior to the history of the word antenatalism or
antenatal prior to 2006. So, um, the first instance
of this word, uh, that we know of, and
there, there might be, uh, earlier examples, but the
first example that we know of came from a
book called Population and world power by Catherine and
AFK Organsky, and it's, it's a population control term.
I mean, that's and it is eugenics and basically
what that, that word meant. Now it's pretty obscure.
I mean, when we go this far back and
when we look at the and and and just,
just to Make clear, like a really formalized sort
of academic literature review or like encapsulation of this
early history of the term, I think has really
not taken place yet. I talk a little bit
about it in some of the works that that
I'm doing with Mati Hairra and also my thesis
and also The End of Sentience, the paper of
mine that just came out. But It's pretty obscure,
but you can, if you research it, I mean,
you can definitely see in various places in the
world, all kinds of different language iterations of the
term anti-atalism, anti-atalist, antitalismo, antenatalista, antenatalismus all over the
world being used in association with Limiting births of
a certain type of people, a certain population for,
uh, basically eugenics. And unfortunately, um, and actually, uh,
uh, in my time at, um, the, uh, the
University of Chicago, you know, I for really for
the first time, uh, read. Works that more kind
of came out of like critical theory, uh, feminist
philosophy, certain like Marxist philosophy, and it does kind
of seem like a lot of those types of
thinkers are more familiar with the usage of the
term as it applies to this pre-Bennetarian understanding. Um,
THEN, then, then the antenatalism that you and I
know and love, you know, that, that, that emerged,
you know, since Benatar and Theo, um, so. It's,
it's absurd to our ears to be like to
hear that people are associating us with population control
and eugenics, but it's just sort of a, it's
actually a pretty understandable misunderstanding if the antenatalism that
they've been familiarized with is this older understanding of
the term. So,
OK, OK, but that's a massive if because that's
because even most antenatalists, I would bet, are not
aware of what you just said. Yeah,
but you know what, anti-atalists have done a pretty
good job of like not paying attention to the
pre you know, 2006 history. Um, AND I think
that's kind of been a mistake. Like we should
have a more formalized understanding that that's the way
that the term has been used prior to, um,
the advent of contemporary antenatalism. We should, because, because
honestly, it's still that prehistory, uh, still influences the
way that like dictionaries around the world. Um, uh,
DEFINE antonym like the, like the definition in the
French definition, uh, in Larous and, uh, Petit Robert,
um, you know, reference things like like direct Malthusianism,
uh, population control, all these different things. Like, again,
to us, it seems insane and it is, but
it's because they're talking about this, this older form
of anti-natalism that did do a lot of harm
to people, you know, that, that was a eugenics
movement and that, that, that, um, so I, I,
I think we should. Uh, BE more informed about
that and know that that unfortunately is what a
lot of people are more familiar with when they
hear this term, and we need to make efforts
to then set them straight that it's like, yeah,
we do share this term with this older history,
but we're something completely different and we have nothing.
We're not for the creation or non-creation of some
lives. It's not a, it's not a conditional stance.
It's not eugenics. It's
yeah, yeah, but, but still making the claim that
that guy made back in November, it, it sounds
very disingenuous because it could,
yeah.
It it it's almost like when er there are
people who say that er Nazism was a left
wing movement just because it had socialism. In the
name, I, I mean, come on, it's that level
of argument, absolutely,
absolutely. I mean, yes, the, the example that you
bring up of this person you spoke to, they,
they, they might not, they might not be informed
by any of what I'm talking about. They might
just, they might just be. Being a jerk about
the whole thing. And, and that's, that's, that's definitely
a possibility too. But I, I like again, I
mean, you know, I, I, I was really, I
was really shocked. Like I took a class that
was about sort of ectogenesis. And again, in, in,
in this class, we, you know, read a different
critical theorists and stuff, and I was, I, at
least on 3 occasions, I was confronted with This
term that like I know to have a completely
mean a different meaning than the meaning that they're
saying and so I, I, I think they're, I
think as time goes on, um. I hope that
there will be sort of an understanding of the
real difference between these two usages of the term.
Yeah,
yeah, no, that's great. That's great. That clarification is
very important and Uh, look, so, uh, would you
like to, just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you currently
on the internet?
Yes, absolutely. Thank you so much, Ricardo. Uh, SO
yes, so I am, uh, I'm the host of
the Exploring Antenatalist, uh, antenatalism podcast. It has been
on hiatus for like a year, over a year,
um, and that's mainly because I've been In graduate
school, it's my 2nd graduate degree. Um, I will
be graduating next month. And, uh, yay. And, uh,
once that's in the bag, I, I will be
bringing the podcast back. I don't know with what
regularity. I, I, I still kind of think it's
gonna be sort of like, when I feel like
it, there will be an episode, but I, I
do intend to continue the show. I miss doing
the show a lot. It's just been too much
to kind of like juggle, you know, um, uh,
uh, you know, uh, uh, um, I, I, I
have been, uh, publishing academically, uh, with, uh, my,
the wonderful Matihaire, um, you know, uh, we have
our, our books together, um, as well as a
number of articles. We got lots of, lots of
irons in the fire, lots of stuff that's, uh,
you know, in peer review. Uh, WE'LL see when
it comes. Out, um, uh, and, uh, and then
I, as I mentioned earlier, uh, my first solo
author publication has just, uh, been released at the
end of sentience, and, um, I have more, uh,
solo-authored works on the way. Um, AND I have
a lot of, a lot of writing that I
want to do and that I, I will continue
to do. Um, AND, uh, so, uh, the antenatalism
never stops.
OK, so look, it's been really fun and amazing
to have this conversation with you, and thank you
so much for coming on the show.
Yeah, Ricardo, it's been an absolute pleasure. Thank you
so much. Again, it's been, uh, it's such a
thrill to finally be on the dissenter and you
do amazing work on the show. So thank you
for everything that you do.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labranth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, John
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.